you need to Value certain things in
order to get any facts in hand in the
first place any statement about facts
relies on having first valued things
like evidence and logical coherence
right if you're if you don't value logic
there's no logical argument you can give
someone to say that they should value it
if if someone doesn't value evidence
there's no evidence you could give them
to say that they should value it that so
it you know epistemology sort of bites
its own tail or or picks itself up from
its Booth although that actually that
actually hearkens back to the isau
problem right because right there you
said and I'm not denying the validity of
anything you've said so far but right
there you said
that without agreeing on the validity of
evidence let's say there's no agreement
about what is and there we've got a
frame problem there right we have that
value that you need to even determine
what is well the question then is well
where does that value come from and you
can't say Well it comes from what is in
some easy manner because you just said
unless you have a value of a certain
sort you can't derive what is and that's
partly why this ought is is ought
problem just doesn't seem to go away
[Music]
hello everyone I'm pleased today in a
variety of ways to have as my guest Dr
Sam Harris who is undoubtedly familiar
to many of you watching or listening to
this Sam is a neuroscientist philosopher
and author of five New York Times
bestsellers his work covers a wide range
of topics Neuroscience moral philosophy
religion meditation practice political
polarization rationality but generally
focuses on our developing understanding
of ourselves and how how our developing
understanding of ourselves in the world
is changing our sense of how we should
live his books include the end of Faith
the moral landscape Free Will lying and
waking up Sam hosts the popular making
sense podcast and is also the creator of
the waking up app which we're going to
talk about a fair bit today which offers
a modern rational approach to the
practice of meditation and an ongoing
exploration of what it means to live a
good life he's practiced meditation for
more than 30 years and has studied with
many Tibetan Indian Burmese and Western
meditation teachers both in the US and
abroad he holds a degree in Philosophy
from Stanford and a PhD in Neuroscience
from
UCLA Sam and I spoke twice few years ago
it's probably four years ago now on his
podcast we got bogged down a bit the
first time trying to agree on a
definition of Truth which in our defense
is not necessarily the easiest thing to
come to an agreement on but our second
discussion flowed more freely then we
met twice in front of live audiences of
about 3,000 in Vancouver and soon after
at Dublin and then at the O2 in London
those were tremendously exciting events
I believe for both of us and for
everyone else involved and perhaps even
for the audiences where something
approximating 9,000 and 8,000 people
respectively listen to our discussions
and we haven't
spoken well for a long time perhaps not
since then even and I so I'm very much
looking forward to this and Sam I first
thing I'd really like to know is what do
you make of those events in retrospect
and they attracted a very large crowd
certainly by our standards and I'd like
to know how you look back on that and
what you think about that well first let
me say I'm just very happy to to see you
and to uh be speaking with you again
it's really it's been uh I think we
spoke once on the phone since those
events if I'm not mistaken but you know
it's been the years pass quickly or all
too slowly depending on what's going on
as you know and uh you know I've heard
about a lot of what you've gone through
um indirectly and what you've put out
there publicly and I just you know I was
you know I was I was worried about you
and I'm incredibly gratified to see you
reemerge and and uh connect with your
audience and and uh be back be back in
the game because thanks man I value your
that a lot yeah well it's I'm pretty
thrilled to be back and to be able to be
talking to people again like this so
let's hope it continues yeah yeah um
well you know it was very interesting
because I mean you know as you know and
as as your your fans know you you really
did kind of come out of nowhere like a
you know on a on a rocket like
trajectory right so you you were
somebody I had never heard of and then
all of a sudden you were the most
requested person for my from my audience
to have on the
podcast and then we did that first
podcast that you mentioned where we we
got bogged down on questions of
epistemology and um which I you know I
think I haven't listened to to it since
but I I I still think it was a useful
conversation and not God is going yeah
and many people found it very valuable I
mean you know it's just to to either to
my advantage or your advantage people
found it valuable uh they heard what
they some heard what they wanted to hear
in it and some some had their minds uh
bent around as um as was intended but uh
people most people many people certainly
thought felt it was a kind of failed
experiment in conversation and we should
try it again and then we had a a much
more amicable discussion on my podcast
and that planted the seed for these uh
public events and if if memory serves we
had one event booked in
Vancouver and you were still not quite
the famous Jordan Peterson yet and then
in like in the 15 days it took us to
actually get to that event um your star
had risen so quickly that we recognized
that the promoter recognized that we had
to book a another event immediately uh
after you know so the next night we we
so we had two back-to-back events in
Vancouver um and then yeah those those
subsequent events with you were really a
lot of fun because we were
disagreeing very strident about fairly
existential topics and by the time we
got to London and and uh Dublin we had
had these immense audiences that were
were segmented in ways that I had never
quite experienced I I've been in front
of you know my home team audience and
I've been in front of a hostile audience
but I've never been in front of an
audience where you know fully 50% or
6040 I mean who I don't know what the
split was at that point but you know
thousands of people were on one team and
thousands of people were on another team
for questions of God and faith and
meaning and yeah but everybody was on
board for the discussion you remember
one thing that happened this was in
Vancouver we were going to switch to a
Q&A and we asked the audience
essentially if they wanted the
discussion to continue because we were
in the middle of it or if they wanted to
switch to the Q&A and was overwhelming
support in the audience for the
discussion to continue which I thought
was quite
remarkable yeah yeah um yeah so it was
it was a lot of fun and uh there was
just a tremendous amount of energy it to
have8 or 9,000 people show up for a an
intellectual discussion really I me they
this it did have the character somewhat
of a debate but it was not framed as
anything like a formal debate and we
were really just having a conversation
and agreeing where we agreed and
disagreeing where we disagreed and it
was um anyway I found it to be a lot of
fun and uh it was ridiculously exciting
yeah and people people loved it so yeah
I've yeah and so what do you make of
that it's like why in the world was what
it was that we were talking about
attractive to so many thousands of
people
well you know when you look at the full
sweep of what we cover I mean in in
those particular conversations we
weren't focusing on areas that we we
agree about much more I mean you know
you and I if if you're going to turn us
loose on questions of
um you know moral Panic around identity
politics and social justice hysteria you
know you and I will agree I think
probably 90% or more on many of those
topics uh and I don't recall us touching
any of that but that but that was in the
in the
background it was certainly it was
certainly the the wind in your sales you
know making you more and more prominent
at that point because you had H hit
those topics so hard
um but you know the topics we were
touching questions of of you know what
is reality and how we should live within
it really you know the fundamental
questions of of you what it means to
live a good life what are the requisites
for living a good life uh how should we
think about our place in the universe so
as to have the best chance of living a
good life um these are the most
important questions anyone ever asks
provided they have sufficient freedom to
even worry about such things right I
mean if the if the wolf is at the door
or in the room well then people really
for the most part don't have the luxury
of of worrying about whether they're as
ethical or as honest or as uh profoundly
engaged with the the present moment um
as they might be but once you get to
something like you know first world
concerns where you have enough material
abundance where you're you know survival
is not a question and when when
political stability is sufficient that
you're not continually worried that you
know your neighbors are going to murder
you
um then you're then it
really I mean then then we you know when
when when you wake up at 3: in the
morning and can't get back to sleep
you're thinking
about what what does this all mean and
what's you know what is a good life one
of the things that we did agree on I
think that sort of provided a container
for the discussions in total was that
there was potentially such a thing as
the good life that that's just not some
you know epiphenomenal abstraction or
something like that but something
Central and
to some degree I think we disagreed
about where the information for deriving
what might constitute The Good Life
comes from but it isn't even clear to me
exactly where those differences lie and
that was part of I suppose the fun of
the discussion and something that I also
hope to continue today because I've seen
since then it seems to me that you've
turned your attention more and more
perhaps not more and more but you've
certainly continued your route into
investigation of what constitutes the
good life and and also your attempts to
bring what you've learned to a an incc
perhaps an increasingly wide audience
using the technology that you're using
now this app that you have which is the
waking up app my wife has um subscribed
to that for the last year and a half and
I joked with you earlier that she
probably spent more time with you than
she has with me in the last year and a
half so that's quite quite comical but
she finds it's quite useful and I took a
good look at it today h how does tell me
about that app and why you're doing that
are you doing that instead of writing a
book or is it another book and and why
are you doing that well I seem to be
doing everything instead of writing a
book the writing a book has has uh
become an opportunity cost that I can't
justify at the moment but uh no doubt I
I will write another book at some point
but yeah between my podcast and app
that's really those are the two channels
where I am putting out my ideas at this
point so why did you switch to that well
I looked at the app and one of the
things you're doing is you've broken
down lectures in some sense into like 10
minute chunks that are focused on
different topics a whole variety of
topics I've got the app right here and
um assuming my phone so the there's
groups of lectures fundamentals mind and
emotion the illusory self Mysteries and
paradoxes and some of the topics for
example the elusory self uh self and
other alone with others looking in the
mirror The Art of Doing Nothing
Mysteries and paradoxes what is real
Consciousness the mystery of being in
some ways it looks like a book right
it's got chapters it's got sub chapters
but why why this why this technology and
and how is it performed for you in
comparison to a book well so I I did
write the book version of this content
or or certainly most of this content so
I I have a book waking up and um it
touches you know it it is my attempt to
ground so-called spiritual experience
you experiences like self-transcendence
and unconditional love and the kinds of
things people experience on you know
various psychedelics you know this is
all of increasing interest to people now
I wanted to ground all of that in what I
consider to be a rational empirical
understanding of the world right I I
didn't want to believe anything on
insufficient evidence so as to prop up
uh the
the importance of these experiences
because they don't they don't actually
need to be propped up by by by you know
in my view Faith or or any unjustified
claim to knowledge um and they do you
know at very interesting points deliver
their own kind of knowledge about the
nature of the mind I me there are things
you can recognize directly in your
experience that put your understanding
of your own
subjectivity um in closer register with
what we understand about the brain right
now not everything is is can be can be
cashed out experientially but many
things
can and U Can I can I can I ask you one
question well I okay so that's there's a
bunch of that that I agree with deeply
and one of the things I've tried to do
to the degree that it was possible when
talking about let's say matters that
could be religious I've tried to stay
out of the religious territory as much
as possible because it seems to me
counterproductive
to make an appeal to Faith would you can
make an appeal to what would you to not
just to experience it's deeper than that
to something like the combination of
experience and science so let me run
something by you as an example and and
see what you think of this because one
of the things that we really sparred
about I suppose or discussed was the the
is a conundrum right right we we agree
that you have to have a because you have
to act and that's the landscape of value
but we ran into some trouble I think
trying to make our viewpoints about
where those oughts might be derived from
you seem to be more convinced than me
perhaps that the step from is to ought
was simpler and I was more convinced
that it was more complicated and there
were problems that still remained
there I'll let you respond to that but I
wanted to talk about this deeper
experience so I was standing with my
wife the other day on the dock of of
this Cottage we have up north and it's
very dark up here and so when you look
up you can see the night sky well enough
to see the Milky Way and actually to see
galaxies if you use the corner of your
eye and and so and one of the things
that's associated with that is an
experience of awe and it's not
surprising because there you are
confronting what's essentially infinite
as far as you're concerned as as much as
it might be for us and I thought a lot
about the experience of awe one of the
things and it's also produced by music
quite regularly one of the things that
happens when you experience awe is that
a vestigal pyo erection uh mechanism
kicks in and that's the mechanism that
makes prey animals puff up you see this
with cats they're quite funny when they
do this they puff up so they look bigger
in in in this when they catch sight of a
threatening predator and so they perhaps
subjectively experiencing experience the
more terror stricken end of awe but that
awe is very very deep it's not it's not
a rational response it's way underneath
rationality it's an instinctual response
and it seems to me as well that it's
Associated very tightly with our
instinct to imitate and it's strange to
think that you could look at the night
sky and that could catalyze a in an
instinct to imitate but we're very we're
very good at using abstraction us
creatures and it's not exactly obvious
what we can imitate and what we
can't so I think that's an example of
this idea that you're putting forward
that the domain of religious experience
let's say a spiritual
experience has a uh biological
underpinning a deep biological
underpinning and you know part of my
question is what's the what are the
implications of that exactly if that if
that happens to be the case so first I'd
like to know if you agree about that
discussion about awe and the is an a
thing and then anything else you'd like
to add I'd like to hear yeah we've
opened many doors there that's a I see a
10-hour conversation but treating just
those topics but um well to start with
the is a bit you're in very good company
most people in science and philosophy as
you know believe there really is a a a
disjunction between is and ought and to
follow hume's
cast aside remarks I mean he didn't go
into it deeply but but at one point um
he wrote that you can't derive an ought
from an is right there's no description
of the way the world is that can tell
you how it ought to be so um and he was
he was decrying the fact that so many
scholars and in general so many
theologians in his time would move
smoothly from is to ought without
acknowledging that they had had
committed a a logical error but I do
think there's a trick of Lang language
lurking at the bottom of this is an odd
talk that is U misleading and
um and it's it's difficult to spot and
you know I believe I've spotted it and
and but I I you know the people who
don't agree with me don't agree with me
I me their intuitions don't pass through
you know the point where I'm I'm trying
to shove them
um and you know it's somewhat analogous
to um the philosopher vidin made a point
when he was criticizing Freud he was
criticizing Freud's not of the
unconscious he didn't he thought this
reification of the unconscious was was
fallacious and you know we can leave
that aside I don't you know that's uh
I'm not sure I agree with him there but
the the point he was making about the
power of language was interesting he
said imagine if instead of
saying uh I saw nobody in the
room we said I saw Mr Nobody in the room
imagine a language that forced us to say
I saw Mr Nobody right just a just
imagine what confusion would be born of
that Convention of language that's
something he said in his I think it was
in the blue
book and there are many places in our
thinking about the world where
language plays a similarly confusing
role where we we have reified something
which is not probably happens with free
will yeah no so I think it's a conf it's
confused us about free will it's
confused us about about death for
instance I mean I think what you know if
you're an atheist who doesn't believe
that any anything happens after you die
right if you think uh there's there's no
rebirth you know there's no
reincarnation and and that Eastern
picture of karma and rebirth is is
probably not true and you think there's
no heaven or hell I me if you really
think you get something like a dial tone
when you
die well many people are left expecting
some kind of Oblivion some kind of
positive nothingness some some some
permanent loss of experience where and
so this notion of n of of
Oblivion um is a of
reification uh but if you if you think
about it more clearly that's precisely
the kind of thing you would not mean if
if it's simply the end of experience
well then you're not going to be
experiencing the end of experience right
this is not you didn't you didn't
experience an absence before you were
born right well the idea that you would
experience is implicit in the way the
question is framed right right there's
there's nothing you're going to suffer I
mean this is something that
epicurus pointed out um uh through
lucretius that you know death is nothing
for us you know where where we are death
is not and where death is we are not
right like there just they're just
non-overlapping sets of facts whatever
those facts are if in fact death is the
end of experience so which is to say
there's nothing to worry about really if
if uh if death is is just the end of
anything um and so how do you think that
relates to is OD so so to come back to
to is an odd I just
think really what we have mean forget
about morality forget about questions of
Good and Evil forget about uh any value
judgment what I and try to return your
mind to something like the Primal
circumstance of Consciousness right I
mean just just imagine waking up from
you know a a 100 Year sleep and you've
forgotten everything about yourself and
now you're just a mind in a world
um in some sense we're all in we're all
potentially in that position in every
moment in our lives you know just seeing
creation aresh right seeing this moment
of seeing hearing smelling tasting
touching thinking for you know as though
for the first time you know clearly do
you know that have you ever heard of the
neurological case I think it was a man
who had bilateral hippocampal damage he
was in the psychiatric hospital and he
woke up like that every second yeah his
wife would his wife would come in the
room and he'd say it's as if it's as if
I'm seeing you for the first time he
lost that he lost the imposition of
memory on his perception and so every
perception was fresh and new yeah well
so and I'm not recommending brain damage
to anyone as a way of freshening up
experience but there's a there's a non
neurologically compromised way of of
grasping this intuition which is it just
in this moment you know experience
really is potentially totally fresh and
totally new and
it but for the fact there's this there's
this everpresent layer of our thinking
about it our reme remembering what just
happened or expecting the next thing
that's going to happen it's really the
conversation we're having with ourselves
in each moment and meditation is a way
of breaking that spell and actually
being vividly aware of the present
moment in a way that that frees you from
this automaticity of just of viewing
everything through your through your
Concepts and your discursiveness that's
a neurologically justifiable viewpoint
too because it looks like the
hippocampal map that more or less keeps
track of in some sense our memories and
then also of our conditional positioning
in the world is likely either it's
inhibiting that more Primal perception
although it's doing it in a very useful
manner generally speaking because it
keeps us oriented enough in the moment
so that we focus on minute the minute
details that might be necessary to our
survival but
it's it's conceivable that it's
simultaneously blinding to blinding us
to a broader and deeper reality that in
some sense is deeply nourishing in the
face of suffering yeah yeah and and
what's more the the mechanism that is
tiling over reality with Concepts in
every moment and keeping us thinking and
perseverating about our experience
rather than recognizing that we're
identical to our experience um let's
table this part of the discussion for a
second I this would go under the
question of what is the self you know
what do we mean by self and what might
trans self Transcendence be but this
whole mechanism is productive of most if
not all of our psychological suffering
right like there's just uh you know all
of our anxiety and depression and fear
and regret and shame and and and an
inability to love even the people we
ostensibly love you know in our lives
you know the cont traction into self
that is so toxic so much of the time um
you know all of our deferring our
happiness to some future time where
we've met all of these goals that that
that raise our status in comparison with
you know everyone else we're comparing
ourselves to that whole stratum of of
being a person is a confection of
endlessly thinking about ourselves about
our past and our future and even our
present and it's possible to punch
through that whether it's through you
know using psychedelics or practicing
meditation or just having you just a a
collision with the present moment that's
engineered by something you know you're
someone Close to You dies or say you
know something something changes music
can do that music can do that and Dan
can do that or you know in certain cases
the you know the awe you describe
looking at looking up at the the Milky
Way right I mean that that can do that
for people um okay so let me let me I
just I just didn't answer I didn't
answer your question
the
this this notion that there's there's
this separation between facts and values
right doesn't doesn't run through when
you when you think of what this Primal
circumstance is like where you have to
figure
out when you have to make sense of the
world you have to you have to try to
understand what is going on in the world
and you have to most importantly you
have to figure out what to do next right
so so I view so you you can forget about
morality forget about science forget
about
anything uh for the moment and just
recognize that the world is such that we
are confronted with a an everpresent
navigation problem we have this the
possibility of navigating both
personally and collectively to places in
the space of all possible experience
that are just manifestly terrible you
know and I and and the worst place I
call the worst possible misery for
everyone right so it is possible to
imagine a universe where every conscious
system suffers as much as it possibly
can for as long as it can you know some
some version of the perfect hell right
and then there's then it's possible to
recognize that whatever you want to call
it whe whether you want to use words
like good and evil or right and wrong or
not every other place on the what I call
the moral landscape is better than the
worst possible misery for everyone right
I agree with that completely that that's
why I studied atrocity for so long
because I figured if I could find out
what the worst thing was that would be a
pointer to the best thing because if you
know the worst thing then the opposite
of that is the best thing whatever that
is that doesn't mean you have to
propositionalization
not equivalent in anything but the fact
that they are equally distant from the
worst possible misery for everyone right
so there could be um so I'm not you know
this this can sound like moral
relativism but it's not it's it's it's
an objective picture morality I don't
think it does but but it's just to say
that there are there may be there may be
very different ways of living where
given the given the have the right kind
of Minds involved you could be happy in
very strange ways and in ways that you
know would counterintuitive for you know
Apes like ourselves um but nonetheless
they could be very far from the the
worst possible misery for everyone so in
any case I call this so so whatever you
want to call navigating in this space
moving away from just uh unendurable
pointless misery right toward you know
Beauty and creativity and joy and love
and you know all of the good stuff we
recognize and again there's there's
there's no we haven't seen the Horizon
of this we we have no idea how beautiful
life could be for for Minds like our own
or or Minds you know significantly more
sensitive and creative and intelligent
than our own uh I there there's no re
had a vision of Heaven as a place that
was perfect where everyone that was in
it was striving to make it better right
right yeah so there's there's
some we we don't know how good things
can get and we don't know how bad things
can get but we know they can get quite
terrible from where our current vantage
point and we know they can get quite
wonderful from our current vantage point
and this is where the distance between
facts and values collapses for me there
are right let me ask you a question let
me just land this final sentence there
there are right and wrong answers with
respect to how to navigate in this space
right there there there is it is and
they're they're right and wrong whether
we've discovered them or not right we
could all be wrong about the thing we
should do next so as to be as happy as
possible you know we could be we could
think we're doing something very wise
and compassionate and useful and
actually we're you know slowly poisoning
ourselves with some you know toxin that
we haven't identified right I mean so
there there are thing so it is truly
possible to not know what you don't know
it's truly possible to not know what
you're missing right for there to be
some happier place on the landscape that
you could get to if only you knew to try
to get to it but you're not trying to
get to it because you're satisfied
you know drinking 12 Beers a night and
you know cheating on your wife or
whatever it is you could have a whole
civilization that is unaware of of just
that's a local Peak not a great one it's
a local Peak but yes uh not as good as
it might be um so there's there are the
so there two ways to see that this in my
view that this this disconnection
between facts and values collapses first
you need to you need to Value certain
things in order to get any facts in hand
in the first place any statement about
facts relies on having first valued
things like evidence and logical
coherence right if you're if you don't
value logic there's no logical argument
you can give someone to say that they
should value it if if someone doesn't
value evidence there's no evidence you
could give them to say that they should
value it so that so it you know
epistemology sort of bites its own tail
or or picks itself up from its boot
though that actually that actually
hearkens back to the isot problem right
because right there you said and I'm not
denying the validity of anything you've
said so far but right there you said
that without agreeing on the validity of
evidence let's say there's no agreement
about what is and there we've got a
frame problem there right we have that
value that you need to even determine
what is well the question then is well
where does that value come from and you
can't say Well it comes from what is and
some easy manner because you just said
unless you have a value of a certain
sort you can't derive what is and that's
partly why this ought is is ought
problem just doesn't seem to go away
yeah but but it goes away because it
goes away the moment you recognize there
is in principle always a mystery at our
backs you know this is true
experientially I me I say I would say
this is true experientially with respect
to the nature of Consciousness but it's
true conceptually with with respect to
even those fields
that pretend to be most directly in
contact with the nature of reality I so
even physics you know when you're
talking about the most rudimentary laws
of physics right there is still there
has to be a first brute fact or a or a
brute axium that you accept that doesn't
that need not prove itself right there's
no self-justifying
epistemology yes well that exact yes I
believe that well I think that that's
why there is an emphasis on faith in
some principle in So Many religious
Traditions is that there is a starting
place there and you're you're trying to
flesh out where that is at least to some
degree so let let me ask you a couple of
or mention one thing and then ask you a
couple more things
so this isau distinction is even more
peculiar when you look deep into the
Neuroscience of perception okay so one
of the most influential books I ever
read was an ecological approach to
visual perception
and it's a classic text on perception
and a very sophisticated one and I don't
think it what it has no pretensions to
mysticism of any sort and so that's kind
of interesting given the conclusion and
the conclusion of the author is that
what we see aren't facts or
objects we see meanings so for example a
six-month-old who crawls towards a
visual Cliff with which is a plate of
glass stretched over a or placed over a
a falling off place the the
six-month-old will stop he won't crawl 7
months I don't remember the exact age he
won't crawl across that piece of glass
right he doesn't see cliff and infer
falling off place he sees falling off
place and there's a condition called
neglect which is characteristic of
certain people who have prefrontal lobe
damage it's called sorry it's not
neglect it's called utilization Behavior
yeah and these people lose the ability
not to act in the presence of a
meaningful object so if they walk down
the hall and the door is open they will
go through the door if you put a cup in
front of them they cannot stop but pick
it up because they don't see cup and
infer drinking they see drinking object
directly and so even that is distinction
is is deceptive in a very fundamental
sense because it's predicated on the
idea that what we see are meaningless
objects and that we lay an overlay of
meaning on top of that and it's not by
no means obvious at all that that's how
we see yeah and that's part of the
reason why it's been so difficult to
make machines that can see and act in
the real world because the object world
is not simple and that value structure
that you're describing that over that
that value structure right that is
embedded in all of our Perceptions in
ways that we are only beginning to
understand
scientifically yeah there's so many ways
in which our you know what's called folk
folk psychological sense of of what our
minds
do uh is is just completely broken right
we have a we have a sense of of the
tools we're using to do anything you
know that would beliefs desires
perceptions uh
expectations uh the movement of
attention right and and our sense of
what all of this is uh from the first
person side has definitely broken apart
in in in many respects as we've studied
these things neuroscientifically from
and psychologically from the the third
person side and understanding ourselves
understanding the world and and our
place within it and what's possible is
inevitably a marriage of those two sides
I mean you can't you can't fully banish
first person experience
because there most of what we we know
about
ourselves has a cash value in terms of
the experiential side I mean there's you
know to take the the greatest case
there's simply no evidence of
Consciousness anywhere in the universe
but for the fact that we know it to to
exist in ourselves from the first
person's side I you can't look at a
brain even a living one and have and
form any intuition that it it's a locus
of Consciousness it's only by
correlating changes in the experience of
living
people with you know tools of
neuroimaging in this case or or things
like EEG where we say okay well when the
brain's doing that there's something
that it's like to experience those
changes right and that and and we
pretend rather often to take the third
person science side off the gold
standard of firsters experience and say
okay well it's really the mind maybe an
illusion you know maybe even
Consciousness is an illusion what we
know is happening is there are brains
that are processing information and
we've got things like synapses and and
neuromodulators and neurotransmitters
and that's the real stuff right that's
the reality this mind part is is some
kind of um right that's definition not
not an observation just tisue reality
right and that's a big problem yeah
there's no you can't you can't banish
the the the side which is in fact uh C
cashing out so many of your claims about
the the nature of in this case the
brain um and but that's not to
say that we can't be deeply mistaken
from the first person side about what
our minds are doing I mean so you know
I'm you know as you as we've indicated
here already I'm an enormous fan of
meditation I think it's I think it's
indispensable for understanding certain
things about the nature of the mind but
you you can't even tell that you have a
brain by meditating right much less you
know what it's doing right so it's like
it's there are things that you there
there some major blind spots in
firstperson experience no matter how you
train experience um but you can notice
for instance that the sense of self the
sense that that you're a subject
interior to your experience that you're
kind of a locus of a
Consciousness that is appropriate in
experience that is that is an illusion
or at best a convention right a kind of
construction that you can cease to
construct and so much of um and so why
why do you why do you believe that
that's so
useful there's something core here
question I want to make I want to make
one observation before we go back to
that so well one of the things I learned
when I was studying ancient Egyptian
mythology was that the Egyptians
worshiped Horus that's the I yeah and we
may have talked about this before
but they weren't worshiping rationality
they weren't worshiping that monkey mind
they were worshiping attention itself
and they regarded attention as the
process that revitalized dead
totalitarianism because they had a God
for that that was
Osiris and so there's something and when
the Egyptians were contemplating what
constituted proper political
sovereignty they regarded the union of
Osiris and and Horus as the emblem of
proper sovereignty and that was the
Osiris that was rescued from his
totalitarian state by his Union with
Horus so it's like the conceptual World
which tends to aify like well like Egypt
in The Exodus book and the attention
process which focuses perhaps on what's
outside of the of totalitarian certainty
and therefore continues to update it and
that's not rationality and I think it's
pointing to something that's similar to
what you're fascinated by with your
concentration on I think it's on
attention per se it's not rationality
it's certainly not right it's not the
contents of thought it's something more
like Direct apprehension and you know in
clinical in clinical practice Rogers
Carl Rogers particularly taking a bit of
a Lea from Freud but he said that if you
attend to your clients which meant
listen to them but it meant attend it
didn't mean engage them in rational
dialogue it it meant more like listen
they will transform psychologically as a
matter of
course
right yes I use attention in a slightly
different way or a
more specific way and differentiated
from something like Consciousness or
awareness itself so that like so and
this is I think this is I I'm sure there
are different ways of using it but
um one tends to to meet this definition
now in in cognitive science and
Neuroscience um
where it's a narrowing of the field of
awareness but there's still a field or
there or it's like a spotlight within
within a larger field so for instance I
you know I'm looking at you on on Zoom
now and I can look at a I can look at
you know one of your eyes right I can
spe specifically look at that eye and I
can focus on that but there are many
other things that I within my visual
field that that I'm not focusing on but
which are nevertheless there and one of
them could suddenly capture my quote
attention right so I'm looking at your
eye I'm doing my best to look at your
eye to the exclusion of everything else
but if you know if a mouse ran across my
desk all of a sudden that would have
100% of my attention and that so it's
that shift it's the shift of the
spotlight that that's the that's the
attentional mechanism that is happening
within this larger context of what I
would call Consciousness or awareness
because it's you know so you're using
attention as the like a like the fobia
right exactly so it's it's the kind of
the cognitive phobia where so that's
where conscious is most intense right
because those neurons are each neuron in
the fobia is connected to 10,000 neurons
in the primary visual cortex so it's
it's tremendously dense cortically and
then so you could think of maybe we
could distinguish these two concepts
this way so at in the center of your
vision at the fobia it's extraordinarily
high resolution Consciousness which we
call attention and then as you move out
from the fobia to the periphery your
your consciousness becomes lower and
lower resolution until out here if
you're speaking visually you can't even
really count the number of fingers that
you see you can see the hands only if
they move and out here it's black and
white and out here it's gone yeah high
resolution F whe focus and you can move
your eyes to put that high resolution
High neurological Vision to work yeah I
would I would use the terminology a
little differently here though because I
wouldn't say that Consciousness is
diminishing at the edges I would say
that the visual perception is so
Consciousness is just the fact that
anything is being known right so you can
be conscious for instance of of very
blurry vision right or you can be
conscious that you're blond that you
can't see anything right but like if you
just close your eyes now even your
visual Consciousness is just as present
it's just you're you're just aware this
the darkness behind your eyelids right
and it's not even all that dark there's
it's scintilating with various colors
right so okay so we could say that
you've got that high resolution
attention in the middle then it gets
lower resolution out to here where you
can't see and then that's all contained
within a broader attentional field right
yes and I would call that that the
broadest possible field just
Consciousness okay awareness fine so
okay so now we know exactly what we mean
by our terms and so and so what I would
what I would say to to your question
which I think is a very important
question you know what's the point of of
examining the self you know much less
transcending it
um there are several points I mean what
the main one is that it is the the
string upon which all of our suffering
is is strung I mean it's just it is just
it is when you feel as miserable as you
can feel that sense of being at the
center of this uh torment
uh and like what what what direction
will you find relief right I mean this
is this is just this is you've got the
cacophony of unpleasant experience and
then you've got this place in the middle
of it or a parent place in the middle of
it from which you're trying to resist
this experience right or figure trying
to figure out how to change it right so
let's say you have a a terrible pain you
know somewhere in your body you know
there's the pain there's a strong
stimulus of unpleasant sensation you
know the burning and and stabbing and
twisting
feeling and then there's this reaction
to it from apparently some point outside
the pain very likely you know for most
people up in the head I mean most people
feel like they're a subject in their
heads that is not not truly coincident
with the rest of their body they don't
feel most people for the most part don't
feel identical to their bodies they feel
like they have bodies and these bodies
can misbehave in various ways and again
so you have a terrible pain
the Pain's down there let's say it's in
your knee you're up here now a a a a
hostage being tortured by the
misbehavior of the rest of your body
right and you're resisting you're trying
to you're trying to find some way of
resisting these
Sensations um and so it is with
emotional distress or unpleasant
thoughts right you know you can have
thoughts that terrorize you um and all
of it seems to suggest I mean this is
you know this is the extreme case of of
Stark uh unhappiness but even in the
best of times right even when things are
going really well and every experience
is very smooth and we're getting what we
want and that you know we we you know
our favorite treats are just a an arms
length away and we're filling our mouths
with with gumdrops or whatever it is
we're we're gratifying this thing at the
center of our experience and it can
never be finally gratified
because experience itself as impermanent
it's just you know it's just you you get
to the thing you want and you Gorge
yourself on it and then not only you
want a new thing you want a new thing me
then you need a drink of water because
this this lingering taste in your mouth
of chocolate mousse or whatever it is is
too cloin and too much and you got to
wash that out so that you're just you
wouldn't want to stay in that state even
if you could and there's some there's
there's kind of this rolling
dissatisfaction even in
satisfaction that we all ENC even in the
best of times right even when you
literally can get anything more or less
anything you
want and and yet we know at any moment
it can be subverted by something
terrible happening you know at any
moment you can suddenly feel like you're
you might be having a heart attack right
and and then that becomes the thing that
the this sense of me in the middle of
everything collapses upon and um and
it's it is it makes life I mean this
this again this sense of of of
being in this vulnerable center right it
makes life this kind of long emergency
that can be pacified
by you know increasingly strenuous
efforts to control experience right we
have to control this thing because at
any mo just we're constantly just if you
just look at any moment we might die
yeah we're we're avoiding death you know
but even you know even for those of who
don't think about death very often and
there are those people um we're
constantly modifying our experience so
as to to avoid discomfort whether it's
social discomfort or physical discomfort
or just every every correction in our
body I if you if you just try to sit
still for an hour you'll notice that all
of the micro adjustments of in posture
that you're now no longer making are
made because you really don't have to
wait long before you feel miserable I
mean your body the amount of pain you
can get just sitting in the most
comfortable chair you can find in your
home and just resolving not to move is
is quite extraordinary it's just you
know it's it's just there's no position
that's comfortable enough that it will
be comfortable an hour from now okay so
when you when you rise out of that into
this meditative State well like what
what's your experience and what has that
done for you personally and ethically uh
um okay so so the starting point which
I've just dimly sketched out of of being
a subject in the head right I mean this
is something that that I I will be be
familiar to 99% of our audience or you
know
99.999% of our audience people feel that
they are they don't feel identical to
their bodies they feel like they have
bodies and now you know they might be
told okay you might want to look into
this practice of meditation you you
might want to just understand yourself a
little better here start with this
practice you can close your eyes and pay
attention to the feeling of breathing
you know the sensation of breathing in
the in the the rising falling of their
chest or the the air passing in their
nostrils and every time you get lost in
thought just come back to the raw
sensation of breathing that's a very you
know basic exercise of you know what's
called
mindfulness and the moment you try try
to do that you begin to discover or you
know some moments down the line uh you
discover that it's very hard to do that
your that your default state is to get
distracted by a conversation you're
having with
yourself and to forget all about this
project of paying attention to the
present moment and it could be it
doesn't matter what it is but you know
the breath in this case and and so it is
in fact true to say that for most people
I me literally
99.9% of our audience uh they couldn't
pay attention to the breath for a full
minute say mhm even even if their lives
depended on it right it's just like it's
simply not in the cards it's not it's
you know the fate of the world could
depend on it and someone who's not
really fairly well trained in this uh
just couldn't do it and so that's
interesting right what's interesting is
that despite your best efforts you get
carried away by thought helplessly
moment after moment
um now being able to break that spell
being able to see thought as thought I
So eventually once you get some degree
of mindfulness in hand you no longer
confine your attention to the breath or
any other arbitrary object you begin to
open it up to everything you can
possibly experience so it's just you
know sights and sounds and Sensations
and emotions and and thoughts themselves
can become objects of
mindfulness but when you can but this is
where this is the kind of Cru The
crucial you know uh kind most binary
difference
which which produces an immense amount
of psychological
benefit the moment you can really notice
thoughts themselves as appearances in
Consciousness rather than what you are
in each moment because what happens is
in the default case the thoughts kind of
creep up from behind us in some sense
they kind of come out of nowhere and
that just feels like me right so I'm you
know I'm trying to
it's a reflex of identification well you
wouldn't act the damn things out if they
didn't feel like you you know and so
they they have to have that impulse to
action in them that that's part of felt
identity right so you're saying that
you're saying and this is part of I
suppose part of the Buddhist tradition
particularly although not only that
being the the puppet of those thoughts
is part of what prolongs suffering at
least under some circum especially being
the puppet of them yes yeah and so and
so this is so but the people you know
listening to us now can feel this so you
know that you know we're talking and
people are trying to understand the
thread of this conversation but it's
comp that they have a voice in their
head that's competing with this right
you know they're trying to listen to us
but they're also thinking right and
they're thinking so they might think
what the hell is he talking about right
like there's just some some intrusive
thought comes in or like oh no wait a
minute he didn't answer the question
that thought that that feels if you're
identified with it if you don't see it
as mere language appearing in
Consciousness or mere imagery right it
feels like me it's like that is the self
that is feels like what I
believe no space around interesting yeah
well one of the things you do in
clinical work all the time especially in
the cognitive behavioral field is you
help people identify those thoughts in
some sense as as objects that to no
longer identify with him and say you
know just because you think that it's
not necessarily true it's not
necessarily you and it's not necessarily
helpful right now we can check and see
if any of those three you know
propositions were true maybe it is you
maybe you do believe it and maybe it is
useful but we're going to start by
hypothesizing that some of these
automatic thoughts are actually what's
driving your misery and I really also
see that as a tremendous danger of
totalitarian ideologies because their
thought systems that are almost entirely
foreign in some sense to the individual
person that invade that cognitive space
that you're describing and then manifest
themselves as unquestioning identity and
if they're blinding the person to some
underlying reality that's actually
revivifying and nourishing and an
antidote to suffering then they're a
tremendous block to exactly that
process yeah yes so so there are two
levels at which we can address this
problem of thought and it's its
connection to suffering uh and one is at
the level of thought itself right it's
like you can you can replace bad
thoughts with better thoughts right you
and you can you can get some you can
triangulate on your your tendency to
have one kind of conversation with
yourself uh and engineer a better
conversation with yourself right and
that's you know yes in cognitive like a
six-year-old for example in start
thinking like a 30y old right right and
what's more 30 old that actually has
good intentions for you right like that
you could a friend right you can make
your mind your friend yeah loved one
even yes yeah yeah imagine that so um
yeah imagine that so that's that's a
that's a totally legitimate way to to
climb out of of the the great hole of of
suffering that people find themselves in
um but there's a there's a more
fundamental and and I'm not I'm not
saying what you know what what I'm
recommending in terms of you know
meditation and mindfulness here is more
fundamental but it is not it's
completely compatible with that you know
more conceptual discursive layer right
and some things I would argue some
things are best addressed on the
discursive layer and some things are bet
better addressed on the on the the more
fundamental layer of well you know when
you're sitting meditating first of all
you're sitting and so it's perfectly
reasonable to adopt a mode of thought
that's healthful and productive in
relationship to the fact that you're
sitting you know those more discursive
propositional thoughts that we've been
describing they're they're higher
resolution in some sense and they're
more practically implementable and so
there's going you want to get that in
order but that doesn't mean that there
that this phenomenon that you're
describing that's outside the entire
discursive structure doesn't exist and
right it's probably also the place we go
at least to some degree when we go to
sleep and we dream and get revivified
it's outside that discursive landscape
and that's necessary for physiological
Rejuvenation yeah well dreams are very
interesting because I think they are
necessary and we know a lot about the
necessity of of REM sleep for health and
so there's no question that that dreams
are doing good things for us but they
also are an experience of Stark
psychosis you know I mean that they are
they are a condition unless you're
unless we're talking about lucid
dreaming this is a circumstance where
you really have no idea what's going on
I mean you you are in reality asleep in
your bed and yet you have transitioned
into another experience which where the
laws of nature are violated you're
talking to dead people you're you know
the sky is the limit right and you're
not even surprised you're doing so
little reality testing you're not even
surprised about these changes you have
so little purchase on who you were just
15 minutes ago when you went to sleep
that it's so I mean it me does mean it
does mean to some degree at that point
though that you have suspended your
unthinking identification with your
daytime propositional thought yeah yeah
but but in in the normal case you're
identified with your dream body and and
your dream Persona and whoever you
whoever you've become I mean you're
you're being terrorized in a in a in a
more malleable the problem is still
there it's just it's it's it's it's more
random and less logically coherent
there's something there about
exploration and change of categories
themselves that's going on but but I can
see your point about it still being that
and and more to the point there's
actually a very close connection between
what happens with ordinary thought and
dreaming so for
instance uh I mean or ordinary thinking
is it to in my view or ordinary
identification with thought I'm not I
don't mean to demonize thought per se
because we need thoughts and and the
goal of meditation is not to get rid of
thoughts it's to be able to recognize
them as as what they are and to
recognize the process of thinking um and
to break this this this pseudo
identification with it but the
identification with thought is very much
analogous to dreaming and not knowing
that you're dreaming and the switch from
a normal dream to a lucid dream is
analogous to to the kind of waking up in
the middle of life that I'm I'm
advocating here where you can actually
just recognize thoughts as thoughts and
there's something that the way in
which thoughts steal over us where it's
like you're trying to pay attention to
something and then all of a sudden
you're you're replaying an argument that
you had with your wife you know
yesterday right and helplessly and it
and it's actually it's it's it's
dredging up the emotion that is
appropriate to that argument right so
now you're getting angry or regretful or
whatever it is
um it's it's quite crazy it's totally
normal I this is the default state of
most people most of the time but given
how unhappy the character of our
conversation is with ourselves most of
the time given that the stories we're
telling ourselves are less than
perfectly inspiring and perfectly
ennobling and and uh you know great you
know opening us to Great reservoirs of
compassion and wisdom right they're not
doing that um it's worth looking into
this and it is it does have this
dreamlike character of both coming out
of nowhere and see
completely seizing the Reigns of of
attention and identity and taking us
elsewhere um and also we forget it we we
it has a that's part of the totalitarian
Spirit of rationality that proclivity
well but but a lot of these songs aren't
rational it's just it's just you're just
rehearsing your experience it's just
like I you'll tell yourself the same
thing 10 times in a row and never and
you won't be bored on the 10th time
you'll you'll like if you just imagine
what it would be like to externalize
your thoughts on a loudspeaker for
everyone to listen to you know and you
were just you it was just helplessly you
know
externalized every every normal person
would sound insane you know because
because of the the perseveration and the
and just the redundancy and the and the
strange structure to the discursiveness
I mean this is this is a
um you know this ever present it's so
it's so ever present that It Strike it
doesn't strike people as strange but to
to be presuming we we have a we have a
dialogue with ourselves as though the I
could talk to the me and that made any
sense at all it's like you know I'm
sitting here and you getting set up for
this interview right and I I'll think
um oh I got to get some water right now
I know if I'm the one to say it and I'm
the one to hear it I know I need water
who am I telling it's like it's like I'm
telling someone else right who needs to
be informed about this well you're
you're probably telling the prefrontal
cortex and it tells the motor cortex so
you know it's that's probably the
hypothalamus talking to the prefrontal
cortex because it doesn't have direct
output over the motor cortex it's
something like that oh well yeah it
remains to be seen whether any of that
is actually functionally necessary but I
I think for the most part
it's not I mean for the most part we we
simply talk to it's almost like we
started talking to our parents you know
once we once we had once you know the
language is incredibly useful as you
know and it's it it is what defines us
as as people in many respects and once
it get T it's like once it gets tuned up
it never shuts off and you know we're
talking to so you know first we're
pre-linguistic and we're just drinking
in language that's aimed at us you know
all the time our parents are jabbering
to us we begin to understand what
they're saying as so much of it is you
know indexical they're pointing to
things and and we're naming those things
we're hearing the the word The Sounds
associated with those the things that
are being grasped and handed to us and
um and soon we begin to participate in
this language game in in ways that we're
not conscious of and once this gets
tuned up we talk to our parents we
jabber to our parents incessantly and
then we jabber to ourselves when they
leave the room and it never stops well
you know in in mcil Christ and I have
talked about this issue and he he's of
the opinion I hope I'm not
misrepresenting him and and it's an idea
that I had shared to some degree is
that the the right hemisphere in many
ways this is in left-handed people at
least and some sense is more regulated
by the underlying limic structures the
motivational structures like an animal
is and and the left hemisphere to the
degree that it's linguistic it inhibits
those right hemisphere functions
tonically and that's likely speech and
what that mean implies perhaps is that
if you can shut that speech off there's
a different mode of perception that's
characterized by the right hemisphere's
immersement in these underlying
motivational systems that might be part
and parcel of that revivification possib
ability that you're I think you're
pointing
to as something that lies outside the
linguistic landscape and that can become
maybe hyperd dominant has become hyperd
dominant in us because we're so immersed
in language I mean from what I can tell
I mean thus far that the the research on
the the neuroimaging research on
meditation is you know still in its
infancy despite the fact that there have
been hundreds and even thousands of
paper papers at this point on meditation
but you know silencing the default mode
network is certainly part of the the the
footprint of of uh the change here that
is relevant and the default mode Network
for people I many people have heard of
this by now but used to be kind of an
esoteric uh topic but just a brief
review the default mode network
is uh called the default mode because it
it was noticed in virtually every
neuroimaging experiment ever designed
that there was this this system of
structures in the midline of the brain
that would would increase their their
activity in between tasks so whatever
the Paradigm was if you're giving people
a reading task or a sensory task or a
memory task or visual discrimination
whatever it is you're putting them in
the scanner they have to pay attention
to something in those epics between
tasks when they were no longer having to
pay attention to something that they're
waiting for the next thing to H be
presented to them this these set of
structures in the midline would increase
their activity and so it was called the
default mode uh it was just the kind of
the brain's idling state but these are
also the structures that that seem to
have a disproportionate amount of
responsibility for self- reference and
self-representation and and they get
tuned up even further when you give
people tasks that require a a a a a
retrospective analysis of the self you
know if I if I gave you a list of words
and I was saying I asked you to decide
you know which of these words apply to
you and which of these words don't apply
to you as a person right that's the kind
of task that would increase you know be
above Baseline activity in in the
default mode
Network um and there are other
components to this uh you know so
questions of identity I mean a lot of
that is is in whole or in part mediated
by the default mode um and it this is
what becomes noticeably quiescent when
you are successfully practicing
mindfulness and it becomes quiescent
in in those experiences with
psychedelics where this sense of self is
is transcended for a time and where
linguistic communication often becomes
extremely difficult yeah yeah but people
experience but so what's interesting
here is that that you know I think
people you know ordinary people who do
not take psychedelics and have no
interest in meditation do
experience interruptions in this sense
of self a lot that just go unre
recognized and sometimes they go
recognized because they're they
so-called Peak experiences or you know
flow experiences where you know they'll
they'll you know even the kinds of
experiences you referenced you know
looking up at the Milky Way you the the
the most beautiful encounter with with
um a starry night you have you know in
that decade say you've gone to the place
where there's the least light pollution
and you've got you know a cloudless
moonless night and then you you point
your gaze Skyward and you get the full
experience that's you know there there
are two experiences people tend to have
when they when they have sought out a
peak experience like that if they're
lucky they really have something like a
a moment where they're lifted out of
themselves and they they can just have
something like this breathtaking
encounter with nature right and then all
too often that lasts you know a second
and a half and then they're just talking
about it and thinking about it and
trying to get back to it but they're
they're still just jabbering to
themselves and to you know whoever's
with them very likely trying to get a
hold of this thing where if you took
mushrooms or if you took acid in that
circumstance well then your linguistic
you know efforts to to get this thing in
hand are completely blown over and you
have the full you know multi-hour
encounter with the thing itself right
and it's you know that's what that's
what's so amazing about psychedelics is
that whoever you are I mean it's let's
leave aside the prospect of having a bad
trip which we know about which many
interesting things can be said the the
so-called good trip you can have on
mushrooms or LSD is this condition
of the data of your senses and your and
in particular in in a circumstance like
the one you described your engagement
with the natural world becomes so so
vivid so Salient
that the boundary between self and world
is completely overcome right so like and
the energetics of all of that suddenly
becomes very Salient so it's not just
like you're no longer representing
yourself also the consequences you know
you know Griffith work and if someone
has a mystical experience on psilocybin
and they're smokers they stop 75% of the
time yeah it's like they live so far out
of themselves that even their addictions
lift yeah yeah right that's quite
something you know you talk about being
possessed by that default Network well
to be possessed by an addiction like a
nicotine addiction is something like
that gone wild and nonetheless going
there
apparently has this transformative
capacity you also see the same thing
with treatment for alcoholics you know I
mean for for years alcohol researchers
have known that the only reliable
treatment for alcoholism is spiritual
transformation
that's hard those empirical researchers
have been wrestling with that for a long
time well I can give it gives you the
sense that you know again I'm not I'm
not claiming that the the the biotypic
vision that one has on LSD or psilocybin
is necessarily the the true Target state
of one's spiritual life I mean it's you
know in some ways I think it's
not it's there's something misleading
about it but at a minimum these this
this can end of Continuum of positive
experience you know just the just being
flooded with bliss and and completely
overcome with with an encounter with the
present moment and and meaning you know
just the perception of meaning whether
that meaning can be rationally justified
in the end right because literally you
can if you're in the right state of mind
it doesn't matter what you're looking at
it doesn't have to be the Milky Way you
can just be staring at a you know a
puddle in the concrete in a parking lot
and all of a sudden that is the you know
the answer to the mystery of existence
right so in some ways it's it's it's
potentially you there's a place to stand
where you can pathologize this you know
this horony of of meaning but you know
leaving that as leaving that criticism
aside The Experience itself proves
Beyond any possibility of doubt that
it's possible to have an utterly
transforming
transformative
and totally satis Ying encounter with
the present moment that isn't itself
dependent on anything happening it's
it's a quality of your attention now
neurochemically that something obviously
has to happen in order to to allow you
to pay attention that fully to anything
but there is a way of granting your
attention to the present moment so that
the sacredness of anything comes fully
into view so okay let me I got a couple
of questions for you on that so let's go
back to this Starry Night idea so I want
to tell you a story I was I was talking
to my wife today about the fact that I
was going to talk to you because she's
been following your meditation course
but at the same time that she's done she
she she was she had a medical death
sentence two years ago yeah
fundamentally okay so she's been through
a variety of forms of hell and has come
out the other side and has changed in
consequence of that and one of the
things she started doing as well as
doing your meditation course was using
the rosary so I asked her today she's
also been talking to the Jonathan Paso
who's a extraordinarily
interesting religious thinker who carves
icons he's a former French Canadian
Young Guy's very very deep person in my
estimation in any case she's been
praying the rosary and I said okay so
well you do that and you listen to Sam's
meditations and so how does that work
and she says well I do the rosary first
I said well what do you why why do you
do that and what do you do and how do
you see them related and she said well
with the rosary so she she's
concentrating on Mary and she said
Mary's a as as a conduit to Christ and
I'll explain what she meant by that in
SEC but um she she it's a I said she she
said well first it's a practice okay so
she does it every day so it's an
embodied practice right so she says the
words and she moves these beads and so
she's moving her hands and there's it's
divided into five sections and so when
her attention wanders from prayer it's
brought back because there's five
sections right so you imagine you have
this tendency to wander off into the
default Network and but by manipulating
something with your hands it ties you to
the present moment yeah okay so it's a
meditative practice uh that that's more
embodied than just sitting still say and
she finds that useful and and well she
says the words well we've talked a lot
about what these words mean and so in
reference to the story for example
there's this series of Renaissance
paintings which are quite magnificent
that show an image of Mary with her with
12 Stars around her head um and with her
foot on a serpent and that's that's an
illusion to the Garden of Eden because
um well Eve crushes the serpent beneath
her foot and so and this is relevant to
your discussion and our discussion
earlier about the deepest of all
evils right cuz that that's a concern of
yours it's been a concern of mine what's
the darkest possible place well the that
snake in those paintings represents that
and that's why in Christianity the snake
which is a predator is associated with
Satan right as the as what would you say
the Emissary of evil or malevolence
something like that and so because Mary
has her head in the Stars she can have
her foot on the serpent and that's part
of that meditation and well she does
that before she listens to your
meditation but that's where I see the
the psychological link let's say because
you want to put your psyche in the
highest possible place whatever that is
and and we don't know what it is exactly
but it's something like what happens
when you look up at the night sky it's
something like that and if you do that
that means that your foot is
simultaneously on that
serpent yeah no I mean I don't have any
um first of all it's wonderful that uh
she's using the app and getting some
benefit from it I I love that and
there's no and my and the ju position of
of doing the rosary with doing you know
what I'm recommending the app is not as
um uh Odd as you might think it is in my
in my view I mean I have you know
it's there there's so
much of
um there's so much there's so much
resonance between what I think is true
and the kinds of things Jesus said right
my only my my issue my my issue with
organized religion every organized
religion is just that
clearly what we're really talking about
are deeper Universal truths about the
nature of of mind right you know whether
we we limit it to human minds or just
mind itself Consciousness itself and so
there's no culture there's no religion
there's no
provincial uh cult that has the full
story and what we really what the really
the burden on us in in in every present
generation you know but certainly now in
in the 21st century where there all the
barriers to to to
um uh
universalization all the barriers to you
know getting information and translating
from other languages all of that's
broken down we have we have access to
everyone's ideas right there have been
100 billion people and a bunch of them
have had good ideas a bunch of them have
had bad ideas and we have access to to
thousands of years of human conversation
my only AR sort out what those ideas
were my my only argument is that we
should only care about using the best
ideas uh and we should and we we no
longer have the right to any deep
serious
sectarianism right now we can be that's
not to say that you can't be especially
taken with with Jesus and the tradition
that has grown up around him uh and you
know you're not you're kind of bored
with Socrates and so you don't spend as
much time with him and that's all fine
but the the problem I I've had
traditionally with organized religion is
religion historically is the only corner
of
culture where people begin saying to
themselves and to their children
we're playing a totally different game
over here this is not just this this is
not a matter of just ideas and human
beings and human conversations and
ordinary books no no these books were
written by God or inspired by God you
know and uh they can't be edited and uh
every I think it seems to me that laying
the danger in that I I'm not disagreeing
with you but it it seems to be the
danger in that is that it it actually
minimizes the problem of atrocity that's
associated with sectarianism because and
perhaps you're not I'll agree with you
you can Heap as many atrocities as you
want on that side of the balance I will
agree with you well okay so this is what
I'm pointing to though because we were
having a dis discussion in some ways
about sacred things and so and then
we're talking about the issue of
religion and so there's a couple of
things I want to say about that doeski
had it right to some degree in the grand
Inquisitor because the do you remember
that story The Grand Inquisitor yeah I
I'm it's been been many several decades
I actually read the book but well the
remarkable thing about that story is
Christ comes back to
Earth and he does some Miracles and it's
the church himself that puts him in jail
and then the head of the church comes to
the jail and says what the hell are you
doing back here the last thing we need
is you we've got everything sorted out
we know what's going on it's like we're
going to put you to death tomorrow
tomorrow and then Christ kisses him on
the lips and the grand Inquisitor turns
white and then when he leaves the grand
Inquisitor he leaves the door open and
that was that's so brilliant and you
know doeski was writing at the same time
of his nche and had quite an influence
on n as it turned out and but because
dovi was writing fiction he could go
places that dovi couldn't go as a
philosopher and one of the things he was
trying to point out was that dis despite
the proclivity to totalitarianism that
you can lay at the feet of sectarian
religion the do left open and you know
all of us have to come to terms with the
fact that our institutions religious and
otherwise tend to aify into these
totalitarian structures that are
analogous socially I think in some ways
to the default Network that you just
described they're trying to point to
something beyond that but you you know
they degenerate and aify and then but
but then we have to go underneath that
too if we're going to get our criticisms
right because as terrified is it's
reasonable to be about religious
sectarianism and totalitarianism it's
also necessary to remember that
chimpanzees go on raiding parties yeah
and and kill the neighboring tribe so to
speak and they're not motivated by
religious concerns and so to to put that
at the feet of religion even implicitly
I think is
I understand
why that's an Impulse but it doesn't
face the problem deeply enough and it
also obscures a potential solution I
think because it it tends it tends to
throw the baby out with the bath water I
know you're trying to regain the baby
yeah I'm trying to save the baby yeah
yeah no I love that baby
um yeah I mean for me the The crucial
variables that make um
religion itself so problematic are one
the religions and and this is true of
the the abrahamic ones in particular the
religions that are focused on a text
right that that can't be edited now you
religious moderates and religious
liberals will disagree with me and
they'll say that the whole tradition is
a matter of you know reinterpreting and
grappling with the the the
contradictions and the um and there's
that's of all a very rich discourse and
blah blah blah but the the real problem
is the books themselves betray their
merely human origin on almost every page
you know there's just like you know it's
true of the plays of Shakespeare it's
true of the Iliad in The Odyssey it's
true of of uh Virgil it's true of Davi
and it's true of the Bible right in all
its parts right so there's just there's
and the you know if you just imagine how
good a book would be could be if it were
truly written or
dictated by by an omniscient being I
mean it's it's just it's trivially easy
to imagine that would be so much better
than they in fact are it's really not
that easy to translate the sorts of
experiences that you're pointing to into
words
no no but it but you can
you well well okay okay let's talk about
that for a minute better and worse
because that's really that that and and
I want to tie this back to your comments
about navigation earlier MH so you know
we do have and this is perhaps an issue
of definition getting the definition
straight again here we do have the sense
that some texts are deeper than others
and I don't think it's reasonable to
disagree about that you can read a
shallow story you think well you know
that was shallow and you can read a deep
story and you think that was deep but
you don't know exactly what you mean by
shallow or deep so ex let me just add
one one footnote here which is somewhat
confounding it goes to what we were just
saying about psychedelics it's possible
for you to be bringing the depth to a
text or to a circumstance or to a puddle
in the in a parking lot that isn't
necessarily there right so like like
this is where it get the postmodern
quandry yeah like literally I you know
you if if you're going to connect all
the dots you know you can I this is
something I did in the end of Faith as a
as a parlor trick just because I wanted
to prove this point is that I literally
walked into a bookstore and went to the
cookbook aisle the bookstore and
randomly chose a cookbook and opened it
up opened it up at random and just just
dictated just wrote down the recipe and
then created a mystical text on the
basis of that recipe I just I just
showed that this recipe which was for
some Hawaiian cookbook was like walks
Beed fish and shrimp cakes or something
and I I took the ingredients in that
recipe and wo a completely confabulatory
mystical text out of those ingredients
now that that was something I was
bringing to the text there was no author
uh uh creating that document that's
clearly a problem and look I actually
people people can always do that right
so that that's it's very hard to keep
score here and to and to be and to be
rigorous all we can do is again and
again have this this experience of you
say something that that on your own side
purports to be meaningful and intends to
be meaningful and you're trying to
convey something and then I and other
people seem to grasp what you're
communicating and we have this inter
subjective convergence which is you
increasingly satisfying and yes so I
mean but I do take your point that there
Doki was writing you know the brothers
katov is a deeply
interesting meaningful document uh and
okay so let's take that take that
AR because you you put your finger on
the postmodern quander right because the
postmodernists in some sense the reason
that they ran into
trouble with
assuming they criticized the notion that
there was a canonical interpretation of
a text because there's so many
subjective interpretations of any text
in fact there's a near infinite number
of potential sub objective
interpretations of any text just like
there's almost an infinite number of
places you could be looking right now
and so it's a huge deep problem so so
and when you say that you can project
something onto the text that in some
sense isn't there that's also a an
extremely deep problem and these
problems are deep enough you know the
fact of multiple interpretations of a
single reality is so pervasive that it
stopped AI researchers it's the thing
that stopped AI researchers from being
able to build functional robots like
it's a killer problem yeah it's a frame
problem that's the frame problem okay so
let's let's let's agree that that exists
but we should also agree and partly I
think by the merits of your own argument
that we do have a reliable subjective
intuition that texts differ in depth
yeah and that that means something so
I'm going to propose what it means and
you tell me what you think about this
okay sure so one of the ways that we
specify where to look at is by looking
at what we deem to be
important and so here's a way of
conceptualizing that and it sort of maps
onto the idea of the fobia extending
outward to less high resolution
Consciousness
so I write a sentence because I want to
write a paragraph I write a paragraph
because I want to sequence paragraphs
into a book a chapter I write chapters
to sequence them into a book I write a
book because I want to be a practicing
scientist I want to be a prac iing
scientist because I'm a good citizen I
want to be a good citizen hypothetically
because I want to be a good person you
know and maybe I want to be a good
person to avoid the hell that you
described okay so those are nested value
structures and we see the world through
that structure simultaneously the whole
thing is there and if one part of it
collapses we make reference to a the
part that contains it that's how we
don't crash like a computer
now that na the navigation that you
described these nested structures
they're navigation maps as far as I can
tell now okay so here's the depth
issue some maps have more other Maps
dependent on them than other Maps
do okay so if I go into
your map structure some of that's even
propositionalization
the deeper axiomatic propositions upon
which many other propositions rest then
that's going to disturb you
fundamentally and that's part of that
experience of depth and and you know
look look you get much more if you're
married and you love your wife you're
much more upset if she divorces you than
if you have an argument about who should
do the dishes MH well why well because
the stability of your marriage is a
precondition for all sorts of other ways
that you perceive the world and if
that's violated well that's
traumatic yeah so so when we so and the
reason I'm trying to get this clear with
you is because you think clearly about
these things but also because it
allows to it allows for clarification of
language in some sense so we could say
that as you go deeper into that nested
structure what you approach becomes more
and more Sacred By definition I'm trying
to Define it
experientially because
the so let's say you're transformed at a
fundamental level that means something
shifts way down deep and that's how you
feel it even in an embodied
sense and and what we've defined as as
human beings as religious as far as I
can tell or as sacred
is our attempt to define the landscape
that is characterized by those deepest
structures of
maps now what you're talking about I
think is outside the map system
altogether in some sense you know it's
the container for all of
it yeah yeah it is in some sense
because or it's it's orthogonal to it I
mean it penetrates it at every point but
it's not reducible to it
and I mean that's why it's so
consequential so for instance I think
you can
so taking accepting your your picture of
nested maps and and depth and all that I
agree with all of that um and Maps can
be more or
less useful and more or less in register
with with the the reality they're
purporting to describe right um so you
can have faulty maps and in science we
really try to get an accurate map and
and we we have a high resolution map
yeah and we have a language game which
is when it's working
is optimized to you know as as Richard
fean famously said not fooling ourselves
right I mean that's like the master
value of not fooling yourself whereas I
would argue in in religious discourse
not fooling yourself is not a master
value and in fact you know so much of
what goes by the name of religious Faith
okay but let let me on terminology then
because you talk about the sacred right
and and and you accept that and and you
also and you also see it as revivifying
and and and crucial to the prevention of
suffering but you just oppose that
against religion and so what what's the
difference as far as you're concerned
between what's sacred and what's
religious uh yeah good question well
so maybe the best way to get at it is by
reference to a principle which
is I think what I think anything that's
true right and this is this is true
scientifically descriptively but it's
true spiritually and it's true with
respect to anything we would call sacred
anything that's true anything that's
real
is discoverable now right it's like a
lit like like if we if we lost
everything if we lost all the books if
we lost all the tools if we lost
everything and we just found ourselves
having to
reboot not only civilization but human
cognition you
know everything that is real is
discoverable from that starting point if
you're even if you're starting at zero
again again now we would we would talk
about it differently we would have you
know we would we would have memories of
what you know some of us would have
memories of all that we'd lost and that
would anchor us to certain expectations
but the point is what is true what is
real what is what is what is the real
opportunity for a
direct self-transcendent engagement with
reality right what what is the real
opportunity let me let me take exception
to that in one manner I see what you
mean I understand what you mean I
believe but here's here's a potential
problem with that
so I I first I'm not saying let me just
close the door to a possible
misunderstanding I'm not saying that we
shouldn't stand on the shoulders of
giants and I'm not saying tradition is
useless in fact you I I would I would
probably agree with you that that we
should be fairly conservative in how we
and how we overthrow our Traditions I
mean so I'm not I'm not arguing that we
should just be radical iconic clasts
that tears we should tear everything
down to the studs and start again that's
not that's not what I'm ADV okay well
what's the difference what's the
difference in Your Vision then between
the tradition that you would be
conservative about and religion I'm not
trying to Corner you I'm just trying to
see how you're making the distinction
conceptually it comes down to to very
specific claims that that I think are
clearly false and which many of our
religions advertise as not only
important but IND ensable for their
projects so take Islam as a spe specific
example is I mean Islam mainstream Islam
not just al- Qaeda style Islam just any
Islam that really is worthy of the name
in the year 20121 is founded on the
claim that the Quran is the literal word
of God it and it is it is not question
is what what does literal mean yeah but
but in the minds of most musim Muslims
most of the time it means that
these stanzas were dictated to Muhammad
and his cave by the Archangel Gabriel
and he he was commanded to recite and he
recited them and what we have here is in
truth the claim the the the the Orthodox
claim is is even more stringent than
what the seemingly analogous you know
fundamentalist Rel you know Christian
Claim about the Bible it's not just that
the Tex TT
itself is is verbatim What
God said uh it's that that the the
document itself is in fact like the the
every instantiation of the physical
document is itself the word of God it's
like it's it's there's sort of a double
layer of sacredness to it is it cannot
be edited is the problem that claim or
is it the problem that the people who
purport to understand it CLA claim to be
100% right no no but the problem is is
that given that claim and given the
actual contents of the book yeah what
you have is an
endless source of Divi divisiveness and
conflict like if you dignify that claim
you say okay this is the most
important series of utterances ever
expressed on Earth this is it let's find
out what the creator of the Universe
wants us to know what he wants us to
know above all else is that one we
should hate and fear and despise and
resist and never befriend unbelievers
right that's that's that message comes
through on virtually every page and a
hell has been prepared for these
unbelievers where their skins will be
endlessly burned off of them and and and
replenished so that they can be tortured
a new right do you think there's any
relationship between that claim and your
observation that failure to take refuge
in the sacred as you've laid it out
Dooms you to possession by the default
Network and puts you into that okay so
it is po is possible to give a very
enlightened reading of this text or
really any text that that allows you to
step out of its divisive and and toxic
uh implication
so I would support that kind of reading
you know if if if we if we were joined
in this conversation by by Muslim
Scholars who said no no don't you
understand
Jordan's spiritual interpretation of
this uh admonishment is precisely what
God intended he intended it to be to be
an engine not of hate and Division and
sectarian tribalism he intended it to be
uh a a device that would allow you to
recognize the the emotional and
cognitive implications of of of being
caught by dualism say right like really
you know etc etc you go as far as you
want in that direction that'd be great
the problem
is the book itself gives no indication
that your interpretation is the Right
One In fact it gives every indication
that it's not and that I'm going to
speaking with a sequence of Muslim
Scholars okay good luck I wish I wish
you good luck there yeah well I I I I'm
praying for good luck because it's it's
a conversation that absolutely needs to
be had clearly I would agree
Sam yeah so I just just to close to
finally close this chapter I would just
say that it's it's not that what you're
doing with the book isn't possible my
concern is
that these book these books tend to make
that very difficult and there there are
other are more plausible uh and easier
Le interpretations that require less
hermeneutics less cognitive B bandwidth
less less principles of Charity and less
cosmopolitanism and and so therefore
it's no accident that you you you wind
up with something like the Islamic State
if you take the Quran very very
seriously and that's that's what worries
me as we as we live in this world where
it's increasingly easy for small numbers
of people to grew up the whole project
for millions of us you know as as
technology you know leverages the
consequence
of focusing on development of the
individual you know because it is
increasingly possible for individuals to
do that so we have to stop doing it yes
yeah I'm with you there look I would
love to keep talking to you I I want to
ask you one more I'm getting tired and
that's why I'm talk because I'm get
fuzzy minded one first maybe we should
do another event sure okay I talk to my
agents um second this idea you had about
escaping from the text let's say and
returning to existential first
principles or phenomenological first
principles the only objection I can see
to that is
that if you lose you can't derive the
way of producing a social
organization directly from the
existential experience and so that's a
right because you think look partly
we're going to derive our sacred values
from this Lev this strata of experience
that you described but there's also an
element there's also the fact that we
derive our values from Collective
Agreement right so we and maybe we feed
the Collective Agreement with the sacred
experience but then if we lose that that
Collective tradition it's very difficult
to rebuild that from first principles
yeah 100% and and and I would say just
to clear up any confusion on point I'm
not suggesting that meditation or even
the the deepest insights you can have
through meditation uh or
psychedelics is
sufficient for everything for for us to
get everything we want out of life right
it's like it's I I think it's proper use
is as you describe is seeding every
other ordinary moment in life with this
capacity to refresh the mind and and
uh
um and an allowance Riv revivify the
stale dogma of men just just it is the
thing that equips us to actually be
loving and unconflicted and relaxed in
the present moment whatever's whatever's
going on but when you ask the question
what should we do do to build a viable
Global civilization there's so many
other modes of of of conversation and
knowledge Gathering and Reliance upon
institutions and and tradition that is
necessary you know I'm not I'm not
imagining some beautiful state of nature
where we have lost our all of the
structure that we've built up over
thousands of years and we just we just
meditate as yogis yeah and then try to
figure out then try to call someone when
our you know internet goes down right uh
we there's a tremendous amount of
knowledge that we need to do anything
well at this point you know as we' just
witnessed in you know getting through
you know now now we're into our second
year of a global pandemic right I mean
we had a lot to figure out how do we how
do we even make sense with one another
in the presence of social media and uh
how do we respond when when trust and
institutions has broken down I there's a
lot to to figure out and meditation and
you know psilocybin and any you know and
and and a a full speed collision with
the with the beauty and profundity of
the present moment isn't the answer to
many of those questions it's just it is
just it's the answer to other things
it's a Wellspring you know like
existential dread and you know uh Etc so
yeah I mean that's um anyway I love
talking to you and I'm very happy to see
your face and it's really good to see
and I remember why why we kept talking
now and maybe I remember why other
people came and listened and so I would
love to do it again sure sure well
because we're we'll hammer it out you
know yeah yeah hey good to see you man
thanks for going to talk to me again and
and good luck with your app and
everything that you're doing yeah and
with your orientation towards the
highest good all of that yeah back at
you back at you okay man take care of
yourself talk soon okay I'll get in
touch I look forward to it
[Music]